<!-- TITLE: Constipation -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: By Scott R. Murdock -->

Constipation is a common issue with pet pigs and it is important to notice when and how often your pig is having bowel movements. If your pig hasn’t had a successful bowel movement in 48-72 hours, then a veterinary visit is needed. An obstruction is always a possibility and needs to be addressed if things are not moving along normally. Many pigs end up passing away from an obstruction that wasn’t treated in time. Pigs hide pain and discomfort being prey animal they know to hide this weakness, so they are not a bigger target for a predator. Therefore, I say to watch your pig, check them daily for unusual activity or behavior, when issues are addressed early most things can be corrected when things go too long they create other health issues and medical issues can and do go south quickly and create compounded problems. I check the belly of my pigs every day. Before they eat a meal if the belly feels loose and a bit sloppy then digestion of food is most likely moving along good, if the belly is hard and the skin feel tight then constipation or obstruction maybe happening this is your cue to pay close attention for a successful bowel movement in the next 6-12 hours. Some of the things you can do to keep your pig from getting constipated are add water to all meals.

There are many very sound medical reasons for adding water to feed, first is the possibility of aspiration of pellet dust creating a lung infection which can become fatal. The other is simple hydration for your pig. This hydration will help with constipation and digestion of feed and prevent U.T.I.’s. Some pigs need to be worked up to wet sloppy feed other take to it easy. All meals with pellets should have water added. Apple Cider Vinegar as a daily supplement help with scours (severe diarrhea) as well as constipation. Giving pumpkin can also help with scours and constipation. In a pig under 40 pounds it can be given at a ¼ can three times a day until the constipation or scours have stopped, in a pig over 40 pounds a ½ can three times a day. I give a half can at least once a week in a meal just as a maintenance additive. Pumpkin is very low calorie and most pigs love it. Use only pure pumpkin and not pie filling or the raw fruit itself is good as well when in season. Most don’t give enough pumpkin to help the situation. A tablespoon of pumpkin isn’t anything but a treat.

Mineral oil can also be used to help move things along, only give a tablespoon in some yogurt or in the meal itself, don’t give it to your pig straight, it is easily aspirated and cause a lung infection. Do not over use can create more issues. You can add fiber to your pig’s meals too in the form or rolled oats, with some pig’s it helps them to sleep at night because it slows digestion, keep them feeling full longer and softens stool for easier evacuation of bowels. Many mass-produced feeds are light on fiber so supplement maximum 1/3 of total feed of oats can help to add fiber to diet. Example you feed 1 cup of pellets a day normally so no more than 1/3 cup of oats to 2/3 cup of pellets. Too much fiber can have the opposite effect so don’t over do the fiber.

Increase in some high fiber fruit can also relieve constipation, raisins, cranberries, blueberries, prunes. Dietary fats can help as well, lard, fish oil, coconut oil, fax seed oil, olive oil to name a few. 1-3 level teaspoons of Epsom salts some have found to help with constipation, mix in water and put into feed. Epsom salts have no salt, Epsom salts is magnesium. Should see results in one to six hours typically? Use sparingly and under doctor supervision if first dose doesn’t cause a bowel movement. You can also use Epsom salts in a warm bath and the absorption of the mineral can help with constipation. Sometime with minor constipation you can add 50/50 water to apple, prune or cranberry juice and feed that to your pig for some relief. Watch your pig’s feces for adjustments in diet, if the feces isn’t clumped together or feces looks like small balls then hydration is typically needed.

I have found that organic feeds seem to cause pelleted feces more often so just make sure your pig is getting enough hydration. Watch urination as well, the color can tell you a lot. If the urine is clear to light yellow your pig is well hydrated. If the pee looks dark yellow or orange, then your pig is most likely in need of hydration. Some medications and some foods like acorns will make the urine discolor so you need to know what they’ve been eating and adjust as needed. I am always adjusting things as they change, and things change in their bowel movements and urine color and amount. It’s your first defense against a sick pig and if you pay attention you can avoid issues before an issue becomes a vet visit. You can use laxatives like Metamucil but I would only under veterinary supervision, too much can cause real problems and sudden stopping use also not a good idea and can cause a rebound effect so follow your veterinarians advise and dosage when using a laxative.

> Note: This is an excerpt from the forthcoming book Pigs & Love (Guide to raising a mini pig). Not to be shared without permission of author.