<!-- TITLE: Dippity Pig Syndrome -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: By Scott R. Murdock -->

# Dippity Pig Syndrome (DPS) or Bleeding Back Syndrome
## Erythema Multiforme
This is one of the most common illnesses for swine and will scare most pig parents terribly. Rest assure it is not typically a life-threatening disease unless you allow a secondary infection to occur, then it can become medically dangerous. It is severely painful and uncomfortable for your pig and you need to act to make your pig comfortable during an episode of dippity. It is a neurological disorder thought to be brought on by stress however it is unknown if it is brought on by external or internal stress that triggers D.P.S.. It is believed that thunder, sunburn, moving the furniture, having strangers over to the house, new pet etc. can cause this issue.

## How to diagnose if it is dippity or something else more dangerous.
Not all pigs will display all symptoms, some pig will get all the symptoms while others may only display two or three symptoms. These symptoms may include a wet spot on the back as if something is leaking then turns to dark red weeping sores running side to side on the back of your pig seeping dark reddish-brown fluid. The sore can present within minutes or hours. Many time pig parents think their pig has been attacked by another animal. Rear legs made of rubber is another symptom of D.P.S., this is where Dippity name comes from, the rear legs of your pig seem not to work, and your pig will dip down, possible falling and have a hard time walking. They will many times hurt by just touching them, they can cry out in pain. They can be very restless, and their body may curl up like a ball with tail tucked in tightly. There are no preventative medications for Dippity, you can only try and make things as comfortable as possible for your pig for the next 48-72 hours. Dippity will typically pass quickly for most pigs, if it should be present after 72 hours a vet visit is in order, good chance it is not Dippity and could be something worse. Best practice to help your pig to be comfortable is to find a temperature-controlled area, blankets and/or comforter to nest in, keep the area dark and playing some soft music is many times soothing for your pig. Talk with them, reassure that they are going to be fine and you are there, this does comfort them and relieves stress. Check in on them, no stress, no loud noises. Keep your pig hydrated as always but keep a closer eye on them when infected. You can give Tylenol or aspirin to help them cope with the pain. Always best practice to talk with your vet before medicating. Enteric coated baby aspirin or adult enteric coated aspirin can be given at 5 mgs per pound of body weight. Most baby aspirin is 85 mg’s per tablet and most adult aspirin is 325 mg’s per tablet. Be careful when giving aspirin if your pig has had surgery or has any blood clotting issues. It is always best practice to talk with your veterinarian before giving any medication. I prefer children’s Tylenol liquid, less issues with bleeding and as always if possible consult with your veterinarian before dosing. The typical dose of Tylenol (5 mgs per pound of pig) or is (1 ml per 6 lbs.) of pig the usual concentration is (160 mgs per 5 ml) or (32 mgs per 1 ml) of liquid Tylenol. So a 90 lbs pig would be 5 mg x 90 = 450 mgs for a 8-12 hour dose. Watch to keep them clean while the sores are present, many owner will apply the antimicrobial Vetericyn or Aloe Vera gel or your vet may even prescribe a hydrocortisone cream. Dippity is most common in the first two years of life and once a pig has contracted D.P.S the likelihood of getting D.P.S. again is higher. Many pigs never get D.P.S. others multiple times in their life. While D.P.S. it is not as typical in pigs over the age of two D.P.S. in older pigs is still possible.

---

> Noet: This is an excerpt from the future book Pig & Love (a guide to raising a mini pig). It is not to be shared without the author's permission.