<!-- TITLE: Head Tilt -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: By Scott R. Murdock -->

Head tilt is a very common medical issue I see all the time.

A tilted head or a pig with its head being held at an angle is typically a foreign object like water, insect, debris in the ear canal. The most common issue will typically clear up on its own which is moisture or water in the inner ear canal. If your pig was just in the pool or took a shower or bath, if your pig was rolling in mud, good chance it’s moisture in the ear and will clear up on its own within 24-48 hours in most case as long as no elevated temperature is involved you are typically fine to wait for it to clear on its own but if it last more the 48 hours a vet visit is in order. If you can get your pig to lay down with the affected ear down can speed the process, this allows to drain and evaporate easier. Always check for an elevated temperature, over 103 means a vet visit is in order and is a sign that an infection is going on. Never let a pig with a high fever go too long, they can and do go down fast. Typically an injection of antibiotic will clear up the inner ear infection.

If it’s a foreign object then a vet will have to go in and get it out. This is something you’ll never want to attempt on your own. You can do permanent damage to the ear drum. Never use cotton swabs to clear the ear only your finger, anything smaller than your finger can and will do damage. Pigs in general do not like you in their ears and will make quick head movements if you are trying to clean with a cotton swab (q-tip), this is typically when the ear drum damage is done. There is brownish wax build up in pigs ears just like humans will get just with some extra dirt. Best bet if you feel you have to clean your pigs ear is a baby wipe or a lightly moistened washcloth and use your finger. You can also rub and fold on their ear and the outer debris and dirt will come loose and your pig will shake its head and loose particles will dislodge themselves and fly out. Gross but effective. The wax is there for a reason, to protect the inner ear from foreign object that can and will get in if this wax is not present. So clean very sparingly and not too thorough. If something smells funky or rotten in the ear you probably have an infection going on and a vet visit is in order.