<!-- TITLE: Mange, Mites, Scabies, Parasites, And Worms -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: By Scott R. Murdock -->

Mange and Scabies is the most common of porcine diseases but is arguably the most treatable. Mange is a parasitic disease that is caused by one of two different mites (Sarcoptes scabiei or Demodex phylloide) that affect the epidermis as a server irritant. This is very uncomfortable for your pig and treatment must be routinely done to stop or prevent infection of disease. Pigs will typically show signs of sores, flicking or shaking ears, small red pimples, lost hair, black mite protein deposits, extreme rubbing and scratching on walls, rocks, trees, pen sides damaging the skin leaving bleeding sores and open the chance of secondary skin infections. Treatment is simple and highly successful when done on a schedule. Typically treat you pig(s) two to three times a year. If your area is more prone to mite infections (check with your vet) then every four months may be necessary but for most areas twice a year will keep mites under control. These parasites are typically picked up from the soil or from other infected animals. If your pig roots outside (hope so) then your pig has potential exposure and a scheduled treatment every six month for most pig owners will keep mites under control. Fleas and tick are not typically an issue for pigs because their epidermis is so thick, fleas and tick can’t penetrate the skin in most cases. There have been some pigs that do get bothered by fleas and tick if this happens Frontline, Advantix and Advantage all labeled for dogs and are safe for pigs. I recommend talking to a vet before using but most of the time just follow the weight requirements for proper dosage if you should find your pig infected by fleas or ticks.

Treatment for mites is simple and effective when kept on a schedule. The two broad spectrum products used to control and kill these parasites and worms are Ivermectin for mites and fenbendazole for parasitic worms, these two products are all that is typically needed. They both can be administered orally instead of injection and it is recommended to give orally because giving an injection can be tricky and does typically upset the pig quite a bit. When reading the packaging or talking to a clerk at a feed store they will typically say it needs to be injected, this is a common recommendation because many other livestock respond to these products injected while porcine an injection is not needed, with these medications administered orally works with very high success with less stress on your pig. If your pig has mites or worms it is recommended to give the medication two to three time in fourteen-day intervals to kill off all the parasites and their eggs after that once every six months keeps them parasite free in most cases. I do recommend giving each of these products, Ivermectin and fenbendazole with 7-10 days in between the two products administered.

If you pig defecates dead worms after administration of medication, then dose again in fourteen days from the last dose. There are other products out there, but these are the two most successful and safe medications that cover the broadest spectrum of worms and mites. Both products can be found at most feed stores and Amazon. Each typically costs about $30 dollars, a bottle will last for years, you will need a syringe to measure out the portions. When given orally either put in a meal, in a dollop of yogurt or favorite treat, make sure no other pet or livestock eats it and the intended animal gets the medication. Ivermectin (1% injectable solution for swine) 0.2 ml/cc per ten pounds of, so 85-pound pig = 90 lbs./10 = 9x.02= 1.8 ml/cc to give as oral dosage.

Dosage for fenbendazole (Safeguard 10% liquid goat suspension most common brand, ok for swine) 0.1 ml/cc per 10 pounds of pig round to the half, so 85-pound pig = 85/10 = 8.5x.01 = .85 cc/ml to give as oral dosage. There are many different versions and strengths, these are the best to use for swine. There is not any known negative interaction between the two drugs given simultaneously, the key is the word known, I have seen nothing negative giving both medications at the same time and I have not seen a report of an issue either, I tend to be more conservative when using medications and prefer to give the two medications 7-10 days apart, your choice probably no harm in dosing simultaneously. One last thing on parasites, its been documented that apple cider vinegar can help in reduction of parasites, do not count on ACV as your only defense, these discussed medications are needed as well. D.E. has been touted as helping with skin mites, although this maybe true it should not be your only defense against parasites, D.E. (Diatomaceous earth) also dries out the skin terribly (this is how it kills the bugs, severe dehydration), be careful if you decide to use to help control these bugs, D.E. used on the skin can cause more issue than it helps in some cases. 

> Note: This is an excerpt from the forthcoming book Pigs & Love ( a guide to raising mini pigs). It is not to be shared with out author's consent.