<!-- TITLE: Pigs And Dogs -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: By Scott R. Murdock -->

Please read this section as many times as necessary to fully understand. There are literally thousands of stories of pigs and dogs living in harmony. Many of these stories are from people who have guardian type dogs, these breeds of dogs have been bred for centuries to guard livestock and are the only breed you are typically safe with, but they can turn as well on a pig just at a much lower rate of occurrence. If you decide to add one of these breed to your farmly please do your research, some breeds are better than others with pigs of the guardian type dogs. Here are the most popular of the livestock guardian breeds, Great Pyrenees, Anatolian Shepherds, Akbash and Maremma. These breeds all have different needs so check and see what fits your situation and lifestyle best. There are many families that have both pigs and dogs without issue. In these homes dogs are never left unsupervised with a pig. There are also thousand of stories and I hear at least twice a week of a family’s docile dog turning on the family pig and either mauling or killing the pig.

# Pigs and dogs are a volatile situation at best.
They must be supervised and never left alone. There are some dogs and pigs that appear to be friends, sleep together, play together, snuggle then out of the blue the dog does the unthinkable and mauls or kills the pig. No matter how well it seems your dog likes your pig or vice versa, it is at the pigs and dogs very core to be natural enemies. Dog are predators and pigs are prey. It is nature and thousands of years of evolution is not going to change in your house on the day you get a pig. Your dog is not the one dog in the world after thousands of years of evolution where the paradigm shift is going to take place. Please do not put your head in the sand on this point. Your dog is a dog no matter what you think or how nice your think your special dog is in your home. It is a deadly experiment that will go wrong at some point with a very high likelihood. The bloody details of these attacks are horrific, it is not a pretty picture when this happens and there is a higher chance of it happening than not happening if you don’t heed my warning and take the necessary precautions. Do not take a chance, not fair to your dog or your pig. A 5-pound dog can be as dangerous as a 100-pound dog to a pig. A pig has no real defense against a dog’s powerful jaw. A predator jaw, your dogs jaw was designed to tear apart flesh and kill.

# Do not use excuses.
My dog is too loving, my dog is too small, my dog is old, my dog is like a cat, my dog is feeble these are all things that may in fact lessen the chance but does not remove the chance in any way of an attack. The feeblest, nicest of dogs can kill or maul a basically defenseless pig in a few seconds. If your pig should survive this attack it will cost thousands of dollars in vet bills. This horrifying fact has happened to many people who refuse to understand the very nature of dogs and pigs. This can not be trained out of your dog because its at their very core, it is middle brain instinct not a learned behavior. This does not make the dog a bad or evil dog in any way, only an inexperienced or mistaken stubborn pig parent that just would not take the time to understand a dog and a pig’s place in the world. Pigs are very stubborn and will challenge just for the sake of challenging. If on this day your pig decides he/she is not in the mood to have your dog walk by or your dog decides to lick the empty pig dish your pig can and will charge or lunge at your dog. The dog takes this as an aggressive behavior and the one-sided war is on. Dog grabs your pig's ear because it’s an easy target and rips it off your pig’s head. Yes, this happens way too often and happens in just a few seconds if someone is not there to stop this interaction it will escalate very quickly. This is a good outcome compared to how it could go down where your pig doesn’t come out alive or worse is mortally hurt and dies a long, painful death and you come home to a horror scene. There are thousand of stories of a dog blinding the pig and ripping both ears and tail off the pig and it happens in a 30 second time frame.

# Just don’t do it, please.
A few and I would even venture to say most dogs will try and get along with the pig, but they speak completely different languages, body language and verbal which neither the dog understands as anything but a challenge. Pigs are jerks and are always challenging for top hog keeping the strongest hog in the top position and even with illness this will be challenged in the herd repeatedly. Hence the phrase, “Top Hog”. It is how pigs lead a herd with the strongest leading. A dog is a pack animal and a pack have a different hierarchy then a herd. A herd has a leader, but it is done as a group instead of a single leader as in a pack. Dogs are hunters and must be lead that way for survival, pigs are scavengers and work as a group very different from a pack. A pig’s personality will change significantly as your pig ages especially the first five years, a dog does not change as drastically, so your dog knows your pig as a gentle soul as a young pig then as he/she ages, and personalities evolve the dog no longer knows who this pig is and now it creates agitation, aggression and confusion in the dog because they just do not understand why this pig is acting different. Not the dogs fault ever, it’s the dog/pig owners fault every time if you are not willing to separate or just unwilling to learn the very nature of these animals and take the proper precautions.

# Cats and pigs are not an issue typically.
A cat will typically stick your pig with a claw and the pig will take a wide birth around your cat from that point on, there are other cats that will cuddle and sleep with your pig which isn’t a problem in most households. Try not to allow your pig to eat cat feces. Many pigs will do this, and cats ingest all kinds of things some may not sit well not to mention cat feces is usually procured from a litter box and ingested cat litter is dangerous for your pig. It can cause veterinary type visit for blockage.

---

> Note: This is an excerpt from the future Pigs & Love (A guide to parenting a mini pig). Not to be shared without permission of author.