<!-- TITLE: Positive Reinforcement Training -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: By Scott R. Murdock -->

# How to correct or teach using positive reinforcement.

You do the correction. As in redirect, let them know with your voice inflections that you are displeased with the bad behavior (try to be consistent with what you say for bad behavior, like BAD PIG OR NO) give it a few seconds or so of not doing that bad behavior then give a small reward for being good. I use banana chips, easy to regulate size and pigs listen when you have one. Also use a sweet soothing tone, baby talk works great on pigs for good behavior.

You have to reward the micro behaviors and lengthen the time between reward each time, they will learn they are getting the reward for the small but good behavior. Never spank, shove, poke, spray water at your pig. They don’t understand except this being an aggressive behavior from you, someone they thought they could trust and they will make you pays somehow later. Corporal punishment may work once or twice but the side effects can be very hard to overcome later. When correcting with corporal punishment you are telling your pig just wait till I’m not around to do this bad behavior. All they understand with negative is to wait till your not there to try the same behavior again and this human is be aggressive so I’ll show them with a little pee over here and maybe a poop log on your favorite pillow. Then you get mad and say my pig has issue, guess what? It’s you that has the issues and your pig knows it. You have affectively trained for bad behavior.

When doing any correction try and use 3 sensory inputs meaning, treat (taste), good boy or girl (auditory), pat or rub (touch). Try and use at least two sensory inputs and alternate treat not being one of them sometimes. This will help when you need to correct and a treat isn’t available.