<!-- TITLE: Understanding Your Pig(s) -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: By Scott R. Murdock -->

# Do not underestimate how smart pigs are.
It’s much easier to train if you understand what you are dealing with. First pigs are MUCH MUCH smarter than your dog or cat and some children. If you can start seeing you pig as a being that has the mentality of a 3-4 year old that is unable to speak English that has to use body language and noises to get their request or point to you, this is a start of understanding how to get your point across to you pig child. Know that they understand English better than you do pig and it’s on you to learn what your pig is saying to you. They look at you as their parent, protector, guidance and teacher. Don’t take this role lightly. They need you and your understanding to thrive. 
If you can change your mind set to these are feeling, loving , stubborn, independent beings and deserve my respect and time to learn you’ll be light years ahead of most pig parents. Pig respond when they are upset like a person not like a dog, when they get jealous or upset they act out not sit in front you like a dog with its ears back, big eyes, shaking... this is not how a pig will act ever. The respond like your spouse or kid. Throw a fit or ignore you or try to hurt back the only way they know how, tear up your things, swipe at you ect...

So if you use micro behaviors techniques and reward for those good types of behaviors, you are communicating they way they understand. They are also trying to train you so be aware, there is more parents being trained then pigs being trained in my opinion. Bonding is paramount in the process. This should be basically your number one goal the first 3 months of having your new pig in the house. If it’s a rehome pig, please take that in consideration,they are coming from a tenuous situation most of the time and have very little to no trust because of what just happened, remember how smart they are and how would you feel. So bonding is the cornerstone.