<!-- TITLE: What About Feeds? -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: By Scott R. Murdock -->

An all-natural homemade feed is always a way to go. Do not think this is less expensive because if you go this method it typically more expensive to mix your own feed if done properly, some say it can be less expensive but I have not witness this to be true if done correctly, please do your research, you cannot just throw some things together and call it feed. A nutritionist is best to consult with if you decide this is the way to go for your pig(s). There are websites dedicated to feed mix and what the best percentage mix and what other minerals and supplements you will need. Just make sure you do your homework and make sure you have all the nutrients needed for a long living healthy pig before experimenting. Most pig owners choose to use a major brand name pig pellet or feed. Just because a pig feed is widely used does not always mean it’s the best choice for your pig. There is a major manufacture of feed that you will see over 50% or more pig owners use to feed their pigs. If your pig has constipation issues, very dry skin, running eyes or a myriad of other issues try something else.

**Here are some things I look for in a good feed.**

First what is the first ingredient? Most of the time you will find corn as the first ingredient. Corn is not bad but there are better grains in my opinion without as much weight gain side effects and more nutritional value. Second, I look for is sugar content that will be disguised as many different things like molasses, dextrose, fructose, and others, theses sugar are not typically needed in a pig diet for the simple reason most will give their pigs some fruit in their daily diet so added sugar is just empty calories and the sugars are there for flavor more than nutritional value. You will be looking at protein percentages as well. Most mini pig feed are between 12% minimum and 16% maximum protein. Fiber you want about 5-7 percent as your pig ages this can be increased to 10-15 percent. High fiber can be tough on a young under one-year old pigs. When your pig is young higher protein is wanted for good growth, a majority of a pig’s growth typically happens the first year or two even thou they grow for the first five years most of that growth happens in the first 12-24 months. If you are using a 16 percent and are having a hard time keeping weight under control look for lower protein as low as 12 percent and fiber as high as 15 percent as to promote good bowel movements. 7 percent fiber maximum until minimum a year or so of age. I also stay away from feed that uses beet pulp as a filler. Beet pulp swells at an accelerated rate and can and does cause gut discomfort and in some cases obstruction and/or constipation.

Pigs do not need another reason to be upset so I stay away from beet pulp as a rule. Some pigs do just fine with beet pulp I choose to stay away, I’m not a fan of beet pulp. It is used widely in horse diets. It is typically at 15-20% fiber which is high in fact depending on your pig’s total diet too much fiber can cause constipation. As with any feed and metabolism every pig is different, so you must observe and adjust as needed. There is no feed guide that you can read and expect the same results with every pig. It takes observation and continual adjustments as they grow and age. My preferred method of checking if you need to make an adjustment in diet is to feel for your pig’s ribs and spine. If the ribs and spine can be felt with anything less than firm pressure your pig is under weight. If the ribs and/or spine cannot be felt at all your pig is overweight. This test is typically best on a pig over 8-12 months of age and older because they are typically changing and growing quite quickly the first year. There is what as known in the pig community as the butt chart. It is helpful but should not be you only gauge of pig weight. I personally have a pig if you should look at her butt only you would say she might even be a little underweight but, in all actuality, she is a bit overweight. Diet is paramount in a healthy pig, many tell me all the time your pig eats healthier than you do, my response is very true for a good reason. A good round nutritional diet is a happy, healthy, less veterinary expense pig in my opinion. It is the one insurance policy that will pay off in the long run more times than not. This doesn’t mean if your pig is genetically predisposed to a health issue it will go away but in a healthy pig proper nutritional feeding will lessen your chance of illness because their immune system will be stronger. Those who don’t pay attention end up with either overweight pigs, pigs with bowel issues, pigs with gut bacteria issues and pigs that are always searching to fill in what is missing nutritionally, and these pigs are the one typically gets into trouble and raid refrigerators, break into cabinets and a myriad of other bad behaviors. This doesn’t mean that every pig that does these behaviors are nutritionally lacking, its more likely to happen in pig that is missing something in his or her diet. 

I personally like organic feeds, some say the word organic is a marketing scam or marketing ploy. In pig feed it seems the companies that use the word organic in their feeds are more about nutrition than the almighty dollar. Just what I have witnessed you make your own call. I have found many of the organic feed look, smell, and my pigs say taste better. 

With that said organic feeds have a shorter shelf life and need to be stored in a more stable environment. 
With all feed you must be aware of mycotoxin. Mycotoxin is poison from fungus. These fungi grow on almost all small grain and there are more than 200,000 know species of mold. Mycotoxicosis is a disease started by the toxin from the fungi. These infected grains can cause severe sickness in your pig. They can cause immune deficiency issues, increase stress sensitivity, and cause damage to liver and kidneys which can result in death. To help prevent the growth of mycotoxins carefully select your feed. Go to feed stores that turn their feed quickly, check dates on feed bags most have use by or manufacture date. Look how and where they store feed. You should try a store your feed in a sealed plastic container and store at minimum room temperature or refrigerate, some will even take half of the feed and freeze it for later use. If you see something that looks like mold, or the feed just doesn’t smell right do not use! When in doubt throw it out. The small amount of feed that will be wasted may save you pigs life or save you thousands of dollars in a vet bills. Best practice is not to buy more than a 30-60-day supply, so you can keep the feed as fresh as possible. 

Most companies are coming up with a maintenance feed for mini pigs. At the witting of this book two main organic feed companies are working on mini formulas. You will see growers and finishers feeds out there. Some are growers acceptable as a maintenance diet not finishers. If in doubt call the manufacture you can get a wealth of knowledge just talking to feed companies. Some feeds are made for just fattening up meat hogs, you want to stay away from these feeds. 

Meat hog are generally free fed meaning they are left to eat as much as they want for obvious reasons, maintenance feeding is measured feeding at scheduled times and many grower feeds will work in a maintenance feeding environment. Feed in general is a controversial subject on most pig forums. I would encourage you do as much reading as possible to come up with your own opinion on the subject and make your best judgment. I have found most using common sense will make good feed decisions for their pig. I’ve given you the path and frame work to make your own educated decision on what you want to feed your pig. In summary do not judge feed on price, or majority use. There are a lot of feed resources on line, I encourage you to read up on the subject and do what you feel best for your pig and their diet. Talk to pig parents, talk to a qualified porcine vet, talk to feed companies. Not all feeds are available in all areas of the country or world so you have to do you own research for your area and what is best for your pig.

> Note: This is an excerpt from the forthcoming book Pigs and Love (A guide to parenting an mini pig). Not to be copied or used without the author's permission.