<!-- TITLE: Why does my pig scream every time I pick him/her up? -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: Scott R. Murdock -->

Pigs are a prey animal, I know I say this repeatedly. This is the very reason most training and interaction with a pig is so different than with the family’s dog. When a pig feels his/her feet off the ground their inner brain is triggered and telling the pig they are in danger. They assume feet off the ground means they have been picked up by a predator and are about to be eaten. Hence the screams of bloody murder, they are just very afraid. It takes repetition, so you pig will remember that when you pick them up they are safe. Must comfort them, talk softly reassuring them they are safe for your pig to allow this they must feel you are in control and protecting them. Use their favorite treat when they calm down, so they understand the quiet behavior is what you are looking for from them when being picked up. Just remember they are just scared to death and getting mad or raising your voice will only exasperate the situation and picking up your pig will never be excepted. Some pigs will lose bowel control because it scares them so much, just be prepared.
A method that helps the pig with being lifted is wrap up their feet in a blanket or towel. When the feet are not dangling the trigger in most cases doesn’t happen. I prefer this method of lifting your pig because in all reality you might be able to pick up your pig for a year or if lucky two years after that a 100 pound plus pig isn’t that great of an experience to pick up.

> Note: This is an excerpt from the forthcoming book Pigs and Love (a guide to parenting a mini pig). It is not to be shared without permission of author.